http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/05/03/world-science-festival-announces-schedule/
We failed with error code - 404.
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/04/arts/international/worlds-fairs-and-their-legacies.html
[World’s fairs exist to provide a glimpse into the future. They showcase technological breakthroughs like the telephone introduced at the 1876 Philadelphia exposition and the diesel engine that chugged along at the Paris fair in 1900, powered by peanut oil, of all things., Fairs also anticipate social utopias through dreamy, aspirational slogans like “Peace Through Understanding,” the theme of the New York World’s Fair in 1964-65, and “Feeding the Planet, Energy for Life,” for Expo Milano 2015 in Milan., Many of the gadgets and doohickeys swiftly become parts of everyday life, though peace, understanding and other heralded signs of social progress remain limited. As for the fairs themselves, sometimes host cities get it right, but the ironic truth is that planners often have a myopic, short-term focus that causes sites to age poorly after the crowds leave., “They don’t think through the whole legacy question,” Robert Rydell, a history professor at Montana State University, said of some fair organizers. “Modern fairs do a lot of planning on the opening but not a lot on the back end.”, The legacies they do leave range from the tragic to the trippy, with an occasionally successful effort at transforming the host city., Little remains of the 1851 Great Exhibition, held in London’s Hyde Park and considered the first modern world’s fair, other than the name of a mediocre team in England’s top soccer league: Crystal Palace. The original Crystal Palace was a huge glass-and-iron structure that housed the exhibition. Although widely embraced by the British public, the structure was moved after the fair closed to a dreary neighborhood south of the Thames, near where the team plays, and was destroyed in a fire in 1936., The years have been kinder to another 19th-century relic, the gateway arch to the 1889 Universal Exposition in Paris, despite being demonized before it was built. A group of French artists, authors and architects called the arch “useless and monstrous” and predicted that it would be “a giddy, ridiculous tower dominating Paris like a gigantic black smokestack.” They had a point, but if you’ve been to the city, you’ve probably noticed that the arch, the Eiffel Tower, is still there., The city that may have benefited most from its world’s fair, because planners conceived it as an engine for urban renewal, not an end in itself, is Seattle. An indication of how well the 1962 fair site was incorporated into the modern city is that many people don’t realize that a fair was held there., “The Century 21 Exposition in Seattle is an excellent example of a site that some know was a world’s fair site but others don’t,” said Jennifer Minner, an assistant professor of land-use planning at Cornell University who has studied the impact of world’s fairs on host cities., Remnants of the fair are hiding in plain sight, including the Space Needle — “this icon that’s analogous with Seattle itself,” Ms. Minner called it — along with a monorail that snakes through a portion of downtown and the “Space Age gothic” United States Pavilion that was converted into the Pacific Science Center., The fair “had a huge impact on Seattle,” Ms. Minner said. The organizers “saw this as an opportunity to highlight the importance of the city and to revitalize downtown. Even if all of their intentions were not immediately realized, Seattle is recognized as an important place to go.”, Many cities built fairs with the intention of sprucing up rundown parts of town, Ms. Minner said, but have far less to show for it. They emphasized getting rid of the old but were less diligent about replacing it with something new., Fair plans “are often utopian, but there’s a darker side,” she said. “In some cases there’s a vision for wiping away what’s there and putting something in its place that’s better for the business community or a better civic center, and there’s been a real cost to that.”, In San Antonio in 1968, for instance, there was “a displacement of neighborhoods that were there before,” she said. Shanghai suffered a similar fate in 2010., The remnants of some fairs are used in beneficial, if eccentric, ways. Hollywood has embraced the odd extemporaneousness of the 1964-65 New York fair. In a crucial, scenery-chewing role, the New York State Pavilion portrayed an alien spaceship in the 1997 comedy “Men in Black.” More than a decade later the site in suburban Queens featured in the climactic scene of another science-fiction hit, “Iron Man 2.”, Financial records for fairs are hard to come by, but New York was considered a substantial loser, Ms. Minner said, because of extravagances born of the excessive ambitions of the organizer, the urban planner Robert Moses. The Seattle fair, successful in other ways, is thought to have turned a profit., Moving further back in time, historians record that the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago lost money, though a handsome return on an attraction introduced there — the Ferris wheel — saved the fair from bankruptcy., No saving was needed for the 1851 Great Exhibition. The Bureau International des Expositions, the organization that oversees world’s fairs, notes on its website that the London event cost £336,000 (about $1.6 million at the time) and took in £522,000., London and Seattle are more exceptions than the rule. “If you simply look at gate receipts and bottom lines, most of these things have lost money,” said Mr. Rydell of Montana State University., It is difficult to assess the true costs and benefits of a world’s fair because money is often spent on civic improvements that are not part of the fair but occur coincidentally. The fairs provide a good excuse to upgrade transportation, power and communications systems and build parks, museums and other cultural facilities., “Many fairs have succeeded on those accounts,” Mr. Rydell said., Expo Milano 2015 has been the catalyst for a construction boom in and around its host city. “Milan is experiencing a season of great economic and social upswing” in conjunction with the event, said Ada Lucia De Cesaris, the city’s deputy mayor for urban planning. The exposition has “surely reinforced” development across the city, she said, though she added that it “cannot be considered its sole driver.”, An express highway has been built between the city center and Expo Milano, which sits on disused industrial land about 10 miles northwest of Milan, and a new subway line connects northeastern neighborhoods to the main line that runs to the fair, said Lorenzo Kihlgren Grandi, a spokesman for the city government. All told, organizers estimate that 60,000 jobs will have been created directly and indirectly from the expo., It’s far too early to assess the impact of Expo Milano 2015 on Milan, but Ms. Minner would remind planners there and in other host cities to take the long view., “Have a 50-to-100-year vision of what the site will become,” she said. “A fair can be very disruptive to the tissue of a city, but it can also leave this incredible legacy.”] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/05/science/new-estimates-for-extinctions-global-warming-could-cause.html
[Climate change could drive to extinction as many as one in six animal and plant species, according to a new analysis., In a study published Thursday in the journal Science, Mark Urban, an ecologist at the University of Connecticut, also found that as the planet warms in the future, species will disappear at an accelerating rate., “We have the choice,” he said in an interview. “The world can decide where on that curve they want the future Earth to be.”, As dire as Dr. Urban’s conclusions are, other experts said the real toll may turn out to be even worse. The number of extinctions “may well be two to three times higher,” said John J. Wiens, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Arizona., Global warming has raised the planet’s average surface temperature about 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit since the Industrial Revolution. Species are responding by shifting their ranges., In 2003, Camille Parmesan of the University of Texas and Gary Yohe of Wesleyan University analyzed studies of more than 1,700 plant and animal species. They found that, on average, their ranges shifted 3.8 miles per decade toward the planet’s poles., If emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases continue to grow, climate researchers project the world could warm by as much as 8 degrees Fahrenheit. As the climate continues to change, scientists fear, some species won’t be able to find suitable habitats., For example, the American pika, a hamsterlike mammal that lives on mountains in the West, has been retreating to higher elevations in recent decades. Since the 1990s, some pika populations along the species’ southernmost ranges have vanished., Hundreds of studies published over the past two decades have yielded a wide range of predictions regarding the number of extinctions that will be caused by global warming. Some have predicted few extinctions, while others have predicted that 50 percent of species face oblivion., There are many reasons for the wide variation. Some scientists looked only at plants in the Amazon, while others focused on butterflies in Canada. In some cases, researchers assumed just a couple of degrees of warming, while in others they looked at much hotter scenarios. Because scientists rarely were able to say just how quickly a given species might shift ranges, they sometimes produced a range of estimates., To get a clearer picture, Dr. Urban decided to revisit every climate extinction model ever published. He threw out all the studies that examined just a single species, such as the American pika, on the grounds that these might artificially inflate the result of his meta-analysis. (Scientists often pick out individual species to study because they already suspect they are vulnerable to climate change.), Dr. Urban ended up with 131 studies examining plants, amphibians, fish, mammals, reptiles and invertebrates spread out across the planet. He reanalyzed all the data in those reports., Overall, he found that 7.9 percent of species were predicted to become extinct from climate change. Estimates based on low levels of warming yielded much fewer extinctions than hotter scenarios., By his calculation, with an increase of 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit in surface temperature, 5.2 percent of species would become extinct. At 7.7 degrees, 16 percent would., Dr. Urban found that the rate of extinctions would not increase steadily, but would accelerate if temperatures rose., Richard Pearson, a biogeographer at University College London, called the new meta-analysis “an important line in the sand that tells us we know enough to see climate change as a major threat to biodiversity and ecosystems.”, But he said that Dr. Urban was likely underestimating the scale of extinctions. The latest generation of climate extinction models are more accurate, Dr. Pearson said: sadly, they also produce more dire estimates., Dr. Wiens also noted that the tropics have been underrepresented in climate extinction studies. In Dr. Urban’s meta-analysis, 78 studies focused on species in North America and Europe, while only seven came from South America. Yet when Dr. Urban combined all the data from South American studies, he found that 23 percent of species were at risk of extinction. In North America, by contrast, only 5 percent faced extinction., What makes this imbalance all the more glaring, Dr. Wiens said, is the fact that most of the planet’s species live in tropical forests such as the Amazon. If climate extinction research took tropical diversity into account, the planet’s overall risk would be much higher., Dr. Urban acknowledged that his meta-analysis is far from the final word. “This is a summary of the best information we have right now,” he said. As predictions improve, Dr. Urban said, they will allow conservation biologists to pinpoint the species at greatest risk of extinction and help plan strategies to save them., The scientists building these new models may be able to draw from data not just on living species, but extinct ones as well., In this week’s issue of Science, an international team of scientists reported a new finding on ocean extinctions over the past 23 million years., They found that some groups, such as marine mammals, have been far more prone to extinctions than others, such as mollusks. Biology can put certain species at extra risk: they may produce few offspring, for instance, or have a limited range., Dr. Pearson said that climate extinction models will need to take other factors into account, as well. “What happens to other species in an ecosystem when a species goes extinct?” he asked. Its partners in that habitat might risk extinction as well., Dr. Urban saw many other ways in which climate extinction models should improve. For one thing, they should take into account the cities, farms and other barriers that humans have put in the way of species seeking new habitats., Given the stark results of research so far, Dr. Urban said, these new prediction models can’t come too soon. “We need to elevate our game,” he said.] 


http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2015/05/03/us/ap-us-google-black-colleges.html
[MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. —  Howard University freshman Alanna Walton knew something was different about the professor teaching her introduction to computer science course., First, there was her name: Professor Sabrina. She was an African American woman, kept office hours until 2 a.m. if that's what it took to see everyone, and had an additional title: Google In Residence., "It was an awesome class," said Alanna who has already chosen her major at the Washington D.C.-based university: computer science., In ongoing efforts to diversify Silicon Valley's tech sector, Google is embedding engineers at a handful of Historically Black Colleges and Universities where they teach, mentor and advise on curriculum., Today 35 percent of African Americans receiving computer science degrees come from those schools, but they don't make their way to Silicon Valley's top tech firms. Google is typical — about 1 percent of its technical staffers are black., Last year a push by civil rights advocate Jesse Jackson prompted several dozen tech firms to release workforce diversity data which showed under-representation of African Americans, Latinos and women in the field., In response, businesses, universities and community leaders have launched initiatives aimed at diversifying their ranks, both ethnically and by gender. The Anita Borg Institute and the National Center for Women and Information Technology have partnered with many companies to support female engineers., Facebook offers "Facebook University," an internship for low income minority college freshmen interested in computer science. Intel has committed $300 million over the next five years toward diversifying its workforce, while Apple has a $50 million partnership with nonprofits to support women and minority computer science majors., Google decided to go to the source, sending a handful of software engineers to teach at Howard, Hampton University in Hampton, Virginia, Fisk University in Nashville, and Spelman and Morehouse colleges in Atlanta., They taught introductory courses, but they also trained students on everything from how to send a professional email to how to make it through a software engineering job interview, which can involve a lot of time solving coding questions at a white board., This summer, 30 of those students will be Google interns. And Howard University graduating senior Christopher Hocutt, 21, whose friends jokingly call him Mr. Google, will be starting at the company full-time., Hocutt said the Google In Residence professors convinced him to apply., "What they discovered was a lot of people weren't even applying to Google because we didn't believe we were skilled enough to do it," he said. "Once we realized we have the skills, we just needed mentorship to make our resume look good, get through the interview, have confidence to try.", Google software engineer Sabrina Williams, who took a semester away from her Mountain View campus this year to mentor and teach at Howard, is thrilled to see her student becoming a colleague., "I'm inspired," she said. "Change is slow, this is going to take time, but I think what's interesting about this program is that it's a different way of attacking the problem of lack of diversity in tech.", Fifteen years ago, Williams was the only female African American computer science major at Stanford University. "I kind of felt awkward so I kind of hid a lot," she said. "It was very difficult.", She said that while "teaching is hard" and the hours at Howard were grueling, she welcomed the opportunity to offer students an experience different from her own. This included taking female computer scientists aside early in the semester, telling them she was available for any questions, and encouraging them to support each other., Legrand Burge, who chairs Howard University's computer science department, welcomes the temporary addition of Google engineers to his faculty., "They're not academics but they have domain expertise that students could definitely learn a lot from," he said. "The word got out and it actually got a lot of students interested in computer science who didn't initially plan to study it.", Indeed, class sizes have doubled in intro courses. Williams had 70 students in one class; about 250 were taught so far this year by Google engineers at all five schools., In the 1970s and 80s a similar program partnered the university with ATT, Bell and Hewlett Packard, Burge said. This time, he said, Google is bringing a disruptive, Silicon Valley mentality to their campus., "The issue with the East Coast and West Coast ecosystem, is that in the West there's a fail fast, fail often mentality," Burge said. "And there's a disconnect between academia, which does not have that try things out, dare to experiment, fail and learn about why you failed, come back and do better, culture.", ___, Follow Martha Mendoza @mendozamarthaap] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/04/world/asia/china-pursuing-strategic-interests-builds-presence-in-antarctica.html
[HOBART, Tasmania —  Few places seem out of reach for China’s leader, Xi Jinping, who has traveled from European capitals to obscure Pacific and Caribbean islands in pursuit of his nation’s strategic interests., So perhaps it was not surprising when he turned up last fall in this city on the edge of the Southern Ocean to put down a long-distance marker in another faraway region, Antarctica, 2,000 miles south of this Australian port., Standing on the deck of an icebreaker that ferries Chinese scientists from this last stop before the frozen continent, Mr. Xi pledged that China would continue to expand in one of the few places on earth that remain unexploited by humans., He signed a five-year accord with the Australian government that allows Chinese vessels and, in the future, aircraft, to resupply for fuel and food before heading south. That will help secure easier access to a region that is believed to have vast oil and mineral resources; huge quantities of high-protein sea life; and for times of possible future dire need, fresh water contained in icebergs., It was not until 1985, about seven decades after Ernest Shackleton and Roald Amundsen raced to the South Pole, that a team representing Beijing hoisted the Chinese flag over the nation’s first Antarctic research base, the Great Wall Station on King George Island., But now China seems determined to catch up. As it has bolstered spending on Antarctic research, and as the early explorers, especially the United States and Australia, confront stagnant budgets, there is growing concern about its intentions., China’s operations on the continent — it opened its fourth research station last year, chose a site for a fifth, and is investing in a second icebreaker and new ice-capable planes and helicopters — are already the fastest growing of the 52 signatories to the Antarctic Treaty. That gentlemen’s agreement reached in 1959 bans military activity on the continent and aims to preserve it as one of the world’s last wildernesses; a related pact prohibits mining., But Mr. Xi’s visit was another sign that China is positioning itself to take advantage of the continent’s resource potential when the treaty expires in 2048 — or in the event that it is ripped up before, Chinese and Australian experts say., “So far, our research is natural-science based, but we know there is more and more concern about resource security,” said Yang Huigen, director general of the Polar Research Institute of China, who accompanied Mr. Xi last November on his visit to Hobart and stood with him on the icebreaker, Xue Long, or Snow Dragon., With that in mind, the polar institute recently opened a new division devoted to the study of resources, law, geopolitics and governance in Antarctica and the Arctic, Mr. Yang said., Australia, a strategic ally of the United States that has strong economic relations with China, is watching China’s buildup in the Antarctic with a mix of gratitude — China’s presence offers support for Australia’s Antarctic science program, which is short of cash — and wariness., “We should have no illusions about the deeper agenda — one that has not even been agreed to by Chinese scientists but is driven by Xi, and most likely his successors,” said Peter Jennings, executive director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute and a former senior official in the Australian Department of Defense., “This is part of a broader pattern of a mercantilist approach all around the world,” Mr. Jennings added. “A big driver of Chinese policy is to secure long-term energy supply and food supply.”, That approach was evident last month when a large Chinese agriculture enterprise announced an expansion of its fishing operations around Antarctica to catch more krill — small, protein-rich crustaceans that are abundant in Antarctic waters., “The Antarctic is a treasure house for all human beings, and China should go there and share,” Liu Shenli, the chairman of the China National Agricultural Development Group, told China Daily, a state-owned newspaper. China would aim to fish up to two million tons of krill a year, he said, a substantial increase from what it currently harvests., Because sovereignty over Antarctica is unclear, nations have sought to strengthen their claims over the ice-covered land by building research bases and naming geographic features. China’s fifth station will put it within reach of the six American facilities, and ahead of Australia’s three., Chinese mappers have also given Chinese names to more than 300 sites, compared with the thousands of locations on the continent with English names., In the unspoken competition for Antarctica’s future, scientific achievement can also translate into influence. Chinese scientists are driving to be the first to drill and recover an ice core containing tiny air bubbles that provide a record of climate change stretching as far back as 1.5 million years. It is an expensive and delicate effort at which others, including the European Union and Australia, have failed., In a breakthrough a decade ago, European scientists extracted an ice core nearly two miles long that revealed 800,000 years of climate history. But finding an ice core going back further would allow scientists to examine a change in the earth’s climate cycles believed to have occurred 900,000 to 1.2 million years ago., China is betting it has found the best location to drill, at an area called Dome A, or Dome Argus, the highest point on the East Antarctic Ice Sheet. Though it is considered one of the coldest places on the planet, with temperatures of 130 degrees below zero Fahrenheit, a Chinese expedition explored the area in 2005 and established a research station in 2009., “The international community has drilled in lots of places, but no luck so far,” said Xiao Cunde, a member of the first party to reach the site and the deputy director of the Institute for Climate Change at the Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences. “We think at Dome A we will have a straight shot at the one-million-year ice core.”, Mr. Xiao said China had already begun drilling and hoped to find what scientists are looking for in four to five years., To support its Antarctic aspirations, China is building a sophisticated $300 million icebreaker that is expected to be ready in a few years, said Xia Limin, deputy director of the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration in Beijing. It has also bought a high-tech fixed-wing aircraft, outfitted in the United States, for taking sensitive scientific soundings from the ice., China has chosen the site for its fifth research station at Inexpressible Island, named by a group of British explorers who were stranded at the desolate site in 1912 and survived the winter by excavating a small ice cave., Mr. Xia said the inhospitable spot was ideal because China did not have a presence in that part of Antarctica, and because the rocky site did not have much snow, making it relatively cheap to build there., Anne-Marie Brady, a professor of political science at the University of Canterbury in New Zealand and the author of a soon-to-be released book, “China as a Polar Great Power,” said Chinese scientists also believed they had a good chance of finding mineral and energy resources near the site., “China is playing a long game in Antarctica, and keeping other states guessing about its true intentions and interests are part of its poker hand,” she said. But she noted that China’s interest in finding minerals was presented “loud and clear to domestic audiences” as the main reason it was investing in Antarctica., Because commercial drilling is banned, estimates of energy and mineral resources in Antarctica rely on remote sensing data and comparisons with similar geological environments elsewhere, said Millard F. Coffin, executive director of the Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies in Hobart., But the difficulty of extraction in such severe conditions and uncertainty about future commodity prices make it unlikely that China or any country would defy the ban on mining anytime soon., Tourism, however, is already booming. Travelers from China are still a relatively small contingent in the Antarctic compared with the more than 13,000 Americans who visited in 2013, and as yet there are no licensed Chinese tour operators., But that is about to change, said Anthony Bergin, deputy director of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute. “I understand very soon there will be Chinese tourists on Chinese vessels with all Chinese crew in the Antarctic,” he said., Yufan Huang contributed research from Beijing.] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/03/opinion/sunday/american-dream-or-mirage.html
[ECONOMIC inequality in the United States is at its highest level since the 1930s, yet most Americans remain relatively unconcerned with the issue. Why?, One theory is that Americans accept such inequality because they overestimate the reality of the “American dream” — the idea that any American, with enough resolve and determination, can climb the economic ladder, regardless of where he starts in life. The American dream implies that the greatest economic rewards rightly go to society’s most hard-working and deserving members., Recently, studies by two independent research teams (each led by an author of this article) found that Americans across the economic spectrum did indeed severely misjudge the amount of upward mobility in society. The data also confirmed the psychological utility of this mistake: Overestimating upward mobility was self-serving for rich and poor people alike. For those who saw themselves as rich and successful, it helped justify their wealth. For the poor, it provided hope for a brighter economic future., In studies by one author of this article, Shai Davidai, and the Cornell psychologist Thomas Gilovich, published earlier this year in Perspectives on Psychological Science, more than 3,000 respondents viewed a graph of the five income quintiles in American society and were asked to estimate the likelihood that a randomly selected person born to the bottom quintile would move to each of the other income quintiles in his lifetime. These estimates were compared with actual mobility trends documented by the Pew Research Center. Participants in the survey overshot the likelihood of rising from the poorest quintile to one of the three top quintiles by nearly 15 percentage points. (On average, only 30 percent of individuals make that kind of leap.), Studies by another author of this article, the University of Illinois psychologist Michael W. Kraus, and his colleague Jacinth J.X. Tan, to be published in next month’s issue of the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, found a similar pattern: When asked to estimate how many college students came from families in the bottom 20 percent of income, respondents substantially misjudged, estimating that those from the lowest income bracket attended college at a rate five times greater than the actual one documented by the Current Population Survey., One experiment by Professors Kraus and Tan demonstrated the self-serving nature of these errant upward mobility estimates. As with the studies above, participants were asked to estimate the ease of moving up the economic ladder. This time, however, they were also asked to estimate upward mobility for people who were similar to them “in terms of goals, abilities, talents and motivations.” In this case, respondents were even more likely to overestimate upward mobility. We believe unduly in our own capacity to move up the economic ladder, and these beliefs increase our mobility overestimates more generally., For those lower in income or educational attainment, lower standing was associated with greater overestimation of upward mobility. Those with the most room to move up were more likely to think that such movement was possible., However, when people were asked to explicitly state how high up the economic ladder they felt, after accounting for their actual economic standing, the reverse pattern emerged: The higher up people said they were, the more they overestimated the likelihood of upward mobility. Being aware of your position at the top of a low-mobility hierarchy can be uncomfortable, because without mobility, sitting at the top is the result of luck, rather than merit., Some Americans were better than others when it came to judging economic mobility. Across both sets of studies, political liberals were less likely to overestimate upward mobility relative to conservatives — a finding consistent with other research suggesting that conservatives see our society as more merit-based than do liberals., In addition, studies by Professor Gilovich and Mr. Davidai found that members of ethnic minority groups tended to overestimate upward mobility more than did European Americans. This result indicated that those with the most to gain from believing in an upwardly mobile society tended to believe so more strongly., Taken together, these sets of studies suggest that belief in the American dream is woefully misguided when compared with objective reality. Addressing the rising economic gap between rich and poor in society, it seems, will require us to contend not only with economic and political issues, but also with biases of our psychology.] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/03/opinion/sunday/mark-petersen.html
[Mark Petersen is chief of the United States Geological Survey’s National Seismic Modeling Project, which forecasts where the earth is likely to shake because of natural or human activity such as fracking., READING “100 Diagrams That Changed the World: From the Earliest Cave Paintings to the Innovation of the iPod,” by Scott Christianson. It’s just fascinating because it shows the whole history of mankind through diagrams. Things like Babylonian tablets that show early attempts at counting and maps that show how people first pictured the world and the constellations. And there’s the original scheme of how they invented the Internet., LISTENING I played piano and cello growing up and I like classical music, particularly Beethoven’s symphonies. They are just so majestic. I’m also learning to play the drums. There are a lot of connections between earthquakes and sounds emanating from a drum kit. In seismology, we care about how rapidly shock waves — which are similar to sound waves — are transmitted, and how that affects buildings., WATCHING YouTube videos about Arduino projects. Arduino is an open-source hardware and software company that designs kits for making digital devices. There’s a very large user community out there. My son, his cousin and I are using an Arduino kit to build a weather station for my father, who has a cabin up at Yellowstone. So far, we’ve got sensors to measure how many lightning strikes there are, the temperature and the depth of the snow., FOLLOWING LDS.org. It’s the website for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I’m Mormon. They have a conference every year and I like to listen to the talks. They are like Ted Talks — really good speakers — but more about values. I also look at USGS.gov. There are interesting articles on earthquakes but also on things outside of my field like water quality and landslides and nature., TRAVELING We go all over the world studying earthquakes and their aftereffects. We don’t go in during the recovery phase but later to study the damage patterns and create predictive models. We work a lot in Southeast Asia and in South America. Most of our funding for foreign work comes from U.S.A.I.D. Earthquakes are hard to predict and forecast in terms of what kinds of shaking. But there is so much riding on it. The maps we make govern $1 trillion a year in construction in the U.S. alone. We don’t tell people how to design buildings, but we give them the best available science to make their decisions., CLIMBING There are a lot of “14er” mountains — mountains that peak at above 14,000 feet — in Colorado, which is where I live. My family and I try to climb one every year. We’ve climbed 10 to 12 so far. It’s a challenge physically and feels like a real accomplishment when you reach the top and look out on the world. But I also think about how a lot of these mountains were created — moving episodically up for millions of years because of earthquakes.] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/03/fashion/weddings/bethany-kell-james-chappel.html
[Kristin Bethany Kell and James Gregory Chappel were married Saturday evening in a self-uniting Quaker ceremony at Rock Quarry Farm in Chapel Hill, N.C. Catherine S. Bridge, a clerk of the Durham Monthly Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends, witnessed the proceedings, along with Andrew D. Bridge, a fellow clerk., The couple met at Columbia University, where the bride received a master's degree in quantitative methods and the groom a Ph.D. in history., The bride, 29, is known as Bethany. She is an associate at the Social Science Research Institute at Duke, where she performs program evaluations and data analytics. She graduated from the University of Central Florida. She is a daughter of the late Marty R. Gladding, who lived in Sarasota, Fla., and was a systems manager in St. Louis for IBM., The groom, 32, is an assistant professor of modern European history at Duke University. He graduated from Haverford College. He is the son of Joanne K. Chappel and Dr. Gary J. Chappel, who live and work in Winter Haven, Fla. The groom’s mother is a professor of nursing at Polk State College. His father is the chairman of radiology at Winter Haven Hospital.] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/04/world/asia/afghan-and-taliban-representatives-meet-in-qatar.html
[KABUL, Afghanistan —  Afghan government officials and Taliban militants began two days of meetings on Sunday in the gulf state of Qatar, and for once neither side denied that the sessions were taking place., Both were also quick to insist that they were not holding peace talks. A statement by the Taliban called the meetings a “research conference,” while Afghan government officials described them as “scientific discussions.”, Still, after years of efforts to get an active peace process going, hopes and expectations were relatively high for the talks, which are being hosted by the Pugwash Conferences, a Nobel Prize-winning science group dedicated to promoting peace. Many of the representative sent by the Afghan government and the Taliban were the sort who would likely participate in any formal peace talks., “These are not peace talks. But it would be fair to say that this is the most encouraging development we’ve seen in a while,” said Mohammad Ismail Qasimyar, the foreign policy committee chief at the Afghan government’s High Peace Council. “After all, peace talks between China and America started with a Ping-Pong game.”, This is not the first such Pugwash Conference to include the two sides, and there have been other similar Track Two talks, as indirect, non-negotiation meetings between the two sides have been called. But in the past, such talks were held under a cloak of secrecy, and actual peace discussions between representatives of the government and the Taliban were routinely denied when news of them became public., So it came as a surprise when the Taliban issued a news release about the current talks, being held at a beach resort near Doha, the capital of Qatar, confirming not only that they were taking place but also who was attending. The parties convened there Saturday and began talks Sunday, with a joint final statement expected to be issued after another day of talks on Monday., The Taliban said that the eight members of their delegation were all attending in their personal capacities, and that the meetings “should not be misconstrued as peace or negotiation talks.”, However, the Taliban delegation includes some significant figures, like Sher Mohammad Abbas Stanikzai, a former top Taliban official and a fluent English speaker who often met with foreign visitors during the Taliban rule, and Sohail Shaheen, the spokesman for the Taliban’s Qatar office, one of the Taliban leaders whose name was removed in 2010 from a United Nations sanctions list as an early step toward confidence-building in the peace process., Mr. Stanikzai was head of the Taliban delegation, the militants said, while stressing that all eight men were there privately and individually. Most of the other Taliban representatives are still on the United Nations sanctions list, including Mr. Stanikzai., The location of the talks was also significant, as the Qataris have expressed an interest in acting as intermediaries in Afghan peace talks and in 2013 hosted an aborted effort by the Taliban to open an office in Qatar as a place to hold talks., The Afghan government side included a diverse array of representatives, among them former members of the Taliban who have reconciled with the government; Tajik, Pashtun and Uzbek leaders; and President Ashraf Ghani’s uncle, Abdul Qayoum Kochai, according to Nazar Mohammad Mutmaeen. Mr. Mutmaeen is an Afghan writer and journalist who previously served as an official in the Taliban government but now lives in Kabul openly. He is known to have good contacts among Taliban officials in Qatar and elsewhere., Mr. Mutmaeen said that the Taliban had agreed on the list of those attending the Pugwash Conference, but overruled some, such as the High Peace Council’s secretary general, Masoom Stanikzai, if they seemed too obviously representative of the government. It also insisted that members of the government delegation come as individuals in personal capacities., Mr. Mutmaeen said that at least two and possibly three women were among the government delegation. Afghan women’s groups have long complained that they had been bypassed in previous attempts to open talks with the Taliban, and noted that they would have the most to lose if repressive Taliban-era restrictions on women’s public roles were to return., The Taliban’s news release added that “a statement for participation in the conference has also been prepared that will be shared with our respected readers at an appropriate time.”, Mr. Mutmaeen said that the Taliban statement was issued to allay concerns among Taliban fighters and commanders in the field about whether formal peace talks had actually begun, which might make it harder to keep them engaged in warfare., Pakistan has long been seen as an important potential broker of any peace process between the Afghan government and the Taliban, given that many insurgent leaders have found continued shelter there. But the Qatari conference represented an effort by the Taliban to strike out independently of the Pakistanis, Mr. Mutmaeen said. “The important point is that there are no Chinese, no Saudis or no one from Pakistan, only from Europe and the United Nations” other than the Afghans, he said. “This is a good development.”, “This is an opportunity,” Mr. Qasimyar said. “They get together, they may have a chance to have tea or dinner or lunch at the same table, and that’s all right.”] 


http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/03/opinion/sunday/star-crossed-on-a-hawaiian-mountaintop.html
[Sometime in the 2020s, when an international consortium completes the Thirty Meter Telescope, the most powerful telescope on the planet, astronomers will gaze from the 14,000-foot summit of Mauna Kea volcano, on the Big Island of Hawaii, out to the edge of the observable universe., Or maybe they won’t. With a militant advocacy not often seen in the Aloha State, a small group of Native Hawaiians and their sympathizers have managed to stall the $1.4 billion project, which was to begin construction in April. They stood in front of trucks on the road to the summit and declared the telescope an abomination — to the Hawaiian people and their ancient religion, to the environment and to the mountain, revered in Hawaiian tradition as the piko, the navel, the island’s sacred center., Several were arrested last month. On Thursday the trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs, a state agency charged with improving the well-being of Native Hawaiians, voted to rescind their 2009 vote of support for the telescope. Now they are officially noncommittal., The political eruption has left the telescope operators — the California Institute of Technology; the University of California; and research institutions in Canada, China, India and Japan — stranded. When they agreed this month to halt construction, Gov. David Ige thanked them for being “respectful and sensitive” to native beliefs and culture., It is not clear when the project will resume., The protesters don’t speak for all Hawaii residents, or even all Native Hawaiians, many of whom embrace the telescope. But it is easy to understand why they may feel fed up. Mauna Kea is a site of wonderment even before night falls and the stars come out by the billions. It is a habitat for threatened insects and birds, and rich in precious archaeological sites. It also has been stressed for decades., The University of Hawaii, which has managed the mountaintop since 1968 under a lease from the state, has at times been a sloppy steward. An embarrassing state audit in 1998 cited its failures to protect the summit’s fragile ecology and cultural resources as it oversaw the development of a sprawling complex of more than a dozen observatories there. Over the decades it has collected little to no rent from its many scientific tenants. (The Thirty Meter Telescope is to be the rare exception, paying up to $1 million a year.), It’s hard to know if the anti-telescope furor has crested yet. The telescope builders have a strong claim to legitimacy, and they are being blamed for things they had nothing to do with — like the 1893 overthrow of the Hawaiian kingdom, the loss of native lands, the state’s many social ills and degraded environment. This is an unfair burden for a group that has spent years cultivating local support, navigating the approval process and successfully — so far — fending off lawsuits. It insists its paperwork is in order. It also points to plans to donate about $2 million a year to local causes like business incubation; job training; and scholarships in science, technology, engineering and math., Mr. Ige, who has been far too withdrawn in this confrontation, needs to step up. If he thinks the telescope is an important asset that promises great benefits to Hawaii’s residents and economy, not to mention to science and humanity at large, he should say so. If he thinks more needs to be done to protect the environment and native interests, he should say what that is and make it happen. His mild news releases urging more dialogue are not enough., Coexistence may never satisfy the core group of protesters who have been demanding the total erasure of technology from Mauna Kea’s peak. What is tragic is the missed opportunity for shared understanding, given that many of these protesters are themselves descendants of some of history’s greatest astronomers, Polynesian wayfinders who set out across the Pacific a millennium ago, guided by the stars and currents, to find Mauna Kea in the first place.] 


